Add introduction post for new conda envs (#59)
coecms/coecms.github.io: posts/2023-02-27-introducing-new-conda.md

---
layout: post
title: Introducing the new hh5 conda environment
categories: python
---
# Introducing the new hh5 conda environment

## Background

> The hh5 python/conda environment has grown vastly in scope since it was first installed many years ago. What started as a place to put important python packages missing from NCI's installations has since become an agile, community-driven, monolithic installation serving almost 600 researchers. Currently, there are 261 packages listed in the file used to construct and update the environment. Once all of the dependencies of these packages are factored in, there are 1,015 total python packages installed in the current `analysis3-unstable` environment. As a result of the work put in by my predecessors at CLEX CMS, an update to the `analysis3-unstable` environment, from a researcher requesting a package through cws_help@nci.org.au to integration and testing of that package, can be completed in under 1 hour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hh5 python/conda environment has grown vastly in scope since it was first installed many years ago. What started as a place to put important python packages missing from NCI's installations has since become an agile, community-driven, monolithic installation serving almost 600 researchers. Currently, there are 261 packages listed in the file used to construct and update the environment. Once all the dependencies of these packages are factored in, there are 1,015 total python packages installed in the current `analysis3-unstable` environment. As a result of the work put in by my predecessors at CLEX CMS, an update to the `analysis3-unstable` environment, from a researcher requesting a package through cws_help@nci.org.au to integration and testing of that package, can be completed in under 1 hour.

```

> That being said, there are issues that had to be addressed going forward. The most important of these issues comes from the sheer size of the environment, at 1,015 packages, the current `analysis3-unstable` environment contains 289,524 files, directories and symlinks. At approximately 10GB in size, this corresponds to an average file size of around 36kB, which is not suitable for the lustre file systems that the conda environments are installed on. Secondly the lack of integration with NCI systems is a cause of problems. As conda is designed to create integrated environments on single-user systems, it installs packages like MPI and SSH, which are not configured correctly for NCI's systems, causing issues such as MPI not working across multiple nodes, or ssh host-based authentication failing.

Reviewer: possibly make this paragraph a list of issues, just to break the big block of text

> The new hh5 conda environment, herein referred to as `conda_concept` is our attempt to address these issues while retaining the all the strengths of the current `conda/analysis3` environments. It is a combination of container and [sqaushfs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SquashFS)-based solution, though use of a container is only a byproduct of Singularity's ability to manage `squashfs` filesystems.  It combines ideas from [Singularity Registry HPC](https://singularity-hpc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), [Rioux et al. *PEARC '20: Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing, July 2020, Pages 72–76*](https://doi.org/10.1145/3311790.3401776) and the current `analysis3` environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new hh5 conda environment, herein referred to as `conda_concept` is our attempt to address these issues while retaining the all the strengths of the current `conda/analysis3` environments. It is a combination of container and [squashfs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SquashFS)-based solution, though use of a container is only a byproduct of Singularity's ability to manage `squashfs` filesystems.  It combines ideas from [Singularity Registry HPC](https://singularity-hpc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), [Rioux et al. *PEARC '20: Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing, July 2020, Pages 72–76*](https://doi.org/10.1145/3311790.3401776) and the current `analysis3` environments.

```

> ## Summary

Reviewer: Maybe use "In short" instead of "Summary"

* Will retain `analysis3-stable/unstable` structure and (roughly) quarterly update time
* New module name - `conda_concept` - to use on Gadi e.g.
```
$ module use /g/data/hh5/public/modules
$ module load conda_concept/analysis3-unstable
$ python3
```
* `analysis3/22.07`, `analysis3/22.10` and `analysis3/23.01` environments are available - they are exact duplicates of the corresponding existing `analysis3` environments.
* New module for ARE - `conda_concept/are`.
![conda-are-settings](../images/conda-are-settings.png)
* Some catches:
    * Can't use direct path to interpreter, must use path to the 'scripts' directory instead if a full path is needed (e.g. in `#!/g/data/hh5/.../python3` shbang lines in scripts)
    * `conda activate` does not work, must load the module.
* Any problems or questions, contact cws_help@nci.org.au, or leave an issue on the [github page](https://github.com/coecms/cms-conda-singularity/issues).

## Usage
Usage of the new `conda_concept/analysis3` environments is very similar to the current `conda/analysis3` environments. On the Gadi command line, or in PBS scripts, run
```
$ module use /g/data/hh5/public/modules
$ module load conda_concept/analysis3
```

> The version naming scheme is carried over from the current `conda/analysis3` environments. The `analysis3-unstable` environment will always be an alias for the most recent environment, and will continue to be updated at roughly 3 monthly intervals. `analysis3` will always be an alias for the next-most recent environment, referred to as the "stable" environment. `module load conda_concept` will always be configured to load the "stable" environment. Specific versions can also be loaded with e.g. `module load conda_concept/analysis3-23.01`. There is also a new module, `conda_concept/are`, designed specifically for use with `ipython` and `jupyter` notebooks. This module loads the "stable" `analysis3` environment, but manipulates the environment such that all of the `analysis3` environments can be used as the kernel for a notebook without having to restart the `jupyter` session.

Reviewer: I found this paragraph a bit heavy, feel free to dismiss my suggestions on how to lighten it up, but I think it needs some changes
```suggestion
The version naming scheme and is not changing. The `analysis3-unstable` environment will always be an alias for the most recent environment and will continue to be updated at roughly 3 monthly intervals. `analysis3` will remain the most recent "stable" environment.

````{note}
```code
 module load conda_concept
```
 will load the "stable" environment. Specific versions can also be loaded with e.g.
```code
module load conda_concept/analysis3-23.01
```
There is also a new module, `conda_concept/are`, designed specifically for use with `ipython` and `jupyter` notebooks. This module loads the "stable" `analysis3` environment, but manipulates the environment such that all of the `analysis3` environments can be used as the kernel for a notebook without having to restart the `jupyter` session.
````

```

Reviewer: I also have a question about the jupyter statement "all of the analysis3 environments can be used as the kernel for a notebook without having to restart the jupyter session" that is my current experience with ARE, regardless of which environment I load

Author: Due to each conda env being in its own squashfs, that doesn't work in this environment unless the `conda_concept/are` module is loaded. I will make that more clear

Author: Actually, you're right. This should just work. I've modified the 'jupyter' command so that it sneaks in all of the available squashfs file systems regardless of which module is loaded.

> On installation or update, a symlink to the launcher script corresponding to every command within the conda environment is created in a separate scripts directory. The launcher script will determine which command needs to be run from the conda environment based on the name of the symlink. For example, running the `jupyter` symlink in the `cms_conda_scripts/analysis3-23.01.d/bin/` directory is the equivalent of running `cms_conda/envs/analysis3-23.10/bin/jupyter` from within the container. The launcher script can also run arbitrary commands. For example, to launch a shell within the container, run `launcher.sh bash`. It is this scripts directory that is placed in `$PATH`, and launches Singularity only when necessary. The downside of this is that `singularity` can be expensive to launch. If your workflow requires launching applications from the `analysis3` environment in quick succession, it may be worth re-factoring the workflow such that it runs from within the container using `launcher.sh`. The typical `analysis3` workflow comprising python scripts or jupyter notebooks is not affected by this, and can be run as normal.

Reviewer: For someone not very experienced this information might looked scary and complicated. We should have the "The typical `analysis3` workflow comprising python scripts or jupyter notebooks is not affected by this, and can be run as normal." reassurance at the start and highlight at first in which use cases this detailed info is useful. Hope this makes sense

## Key differences between `conda_concept` and `conda`

> The key difference of the approach used by the `conda_concept` environments is the use of singularity's ability to manage squashfs file systems. A squashfs can be thought of a something like a tar file that can be accessed as if it were an entirely new file system. The obvious advantage of placing a conda environment in a squashfs is that it reduces the file count of the entire environment on `/g/data` to one. The drawback of using singularity to manage the squashfs is that containers have a number of restrictions placed on them for security reasons, (e.g. the `newgrp`, `switchproj` and `qcat` commands cannot be run from inside a container). Because of this, once the module is loaded, the user is kept out of the containerised environment unless a command that exists inside the container is run. This is accomplished by the use of a 'launcher' script that runs `singularity` and executes the command from within the container. For more details on this, see the [CMS Wiki page](https://climate-cms.org/cms-wiki/resources/resources-conda-setup.html). This leads to known issues with the environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key difference of the approach used by the `conda_concept` environments is the use of singularity's ability to manage squashfs file systems. A squashfs can be thought of a something like a tar file that can be accessed as if it were an entirely new file system. The obvious advantage of placing a conda environment in a squashfs is that it reduces the file count of the entire environment on `/g/data` to one. 
The drawback of using singularity to manage the squashfs is that containers have a number of restrictions placed on them for security reasons, (e.g. the `newgrp`, `switchproj` and `qcat` commands cannot be run from inside a container). Because of this, once the module is loaded, the user is kept out of the containerised environment unless a command that exists inside the container is run. This is accomplished using a 'launcher' script that runs `singularity` and executes the command from within the container. For more details on this, see the [CMS Wiki page](https://climate-cms.org/cms-wiki/resources/resources-conda-setup.html). This leads to known issues with the environment. 

```
